## How to use CriticalSpacing to measure an observer's critical spacing and acuity for single and repeated targets.

"CriticalSpacing.m" is a MATLAB program developed by Denis Pelli at NYU, with help from Hörmet Yiltiz. You can read more about this program and its purpose in our
2016 article:

Pelli, D. G., Waugh, S. J., Martelli, M., Crutch, S. J., Primativo, S., Yong, K. X., Rhodes, M., Yee, K., Wu, X., Famira, H. F., & Yiltiz, H. (2016) A clinical test for visual crowding [version 1; referees: 2 approved with reservations]. F1000Research 5:81 (doi: 10.12688/f1000research.7835.1) [http://f1000research.com/articles/5-81/v1](http://f1000research.com/articles/5-81/v1)

To install and run CriticalSpacing on your machine, please do the following:

1. DOWNLOAD the CriticalSpacing software:
[https://github.com/denispelli/CriticalSpacing/archive/v0.3.zip](https://github.com/denispelli/CriticalSpacing/archive/v0.3.zip)
1. UNPACK the “zip” archive, producing a folder called CriticalSpacing.
1. READ INSTRUCTIONS. Inside the CriticalSpacing folder, open the Word document, "Install CriticalSpacing.docx" for detailed instructions for installation of MATLAB and CriticalSpacing.
1. OBSOLETE: INSTALL MATLAB (or GNU Octave) and Psychtoolbox. If you haven't already installed MATLAB, you can find detailed instructions here:
[https://github.com/hyiltiz/ObjectRecognition/blob/master/README.txt](https://github.com/hyiltiz/ObjectRecognition/blob/master/README.txt)
1. TYPE "help CriticalSpacing" in the MATLAB Command Window. THE REST OF THIS ADVICE, BELOW, IS MORE OR LESS THE SAME AS THAT HELP TEXT.
1. PRINT THE ALPHABET. Choose a font from those available in the CriticalSpacing/pdf/ folder. They are all available if you set o.readAlphabetFromDisk=1. We recommend "Pelli" for threshold spacing and Sloan for threshold size. Print the PDF for your font, e.g. “Pelli alphabet.pdf” or “Sloan alphabet.pdf”. Give the printed alphabet page to your observer. It shows the possible letters, e.g. “DHKNORSVZ” or “1234567889”. Most observers will find it helpful to consult this page while choosing an answer, especially when they are guessing. And children may prefer to respond by pointing at the target letters, one by one, on the alphabet page.
1. RUN A SCRIPT. To test an observer, double click “runCriticalSpacing.m” or your own modified script. They're easy to write. Say "Ok" if MATLAB offers to change the current folder. CriticalSpacing automatically saves your results to the “CriticalSpacing/data” folder. The filenames are unique and intuitive, so it's ok to let lots of data accumulate in the data folder. runCriticalSpacing takes 5 min to test one observer (with 20 trials per threshold), measuring two thresholds, interleaved. 
1. CHOOSE VIEWING DISTANCE. You can provide a default in your script, e.g. o.viewingDistanceCm=400. CriticalSpacing invites you to modify the viewing distance (or declare that you're using a mirror) at the beginning of each run. You need long distance to display tiny letters, and you need short viewing distance to display peripheral letters. When viewing foveally, please err on the side of making the viewing distance longer than necessary. If you use too short a viewing distance then the minimum size and spacing may be bigger than the threshold you want to measure. CriticalSpacing.m warns you at the end of the run if the estimated threshold is smaller than the minimum possible size or spacing at the current distance, and suggests that you increase the viewing distance in subsequent runs.
1. GET WIRELESS KEYBOARD. A normally sighted observer viewing foveally has excellent vision and must be many meters away from the screen, and thus will be unable to reach a built-in keyboard attached to the screen. The quickest way to overcome this is for the experimenter to type what the observer says. A more convenient solution is to get a wireless or long-cable keyboard. 
1. CAPS LOCK KEY: DISPLAY THE ALPHABET. Anytime that CriticalSpacing is running trials, pressing the caps lock key will display the font's alphabet at a large size, filling the screen. (The shift key works too, but it's dangerous on Windows. On Windows, pressing the shit key five times provokes a "sticky keys" dialog that you can't see because it's hidden behind the CriticalSpacing window, so you're stuck. The caps lock key is safe.)
1. ESCAPE KEY: QUIT. You can always terminate the current run by hitting the escape key on your keyboard (typically in upper left, labeled "esc"). CriticalSpacing will end the run, print out and save to disk the results so far, and ask whether you're quitting the whole session or prefer to proceed to the next run.
1. SPACE KEY: SKIP THIS TRIAL. To make it easier to test children, we’ve softened the "forced" in forced choice. If you (the experimenter) think the observer is overwhelmed by this trial, you can press the spacebar instead of a letter and the program will immediately go to the next trial, which will be easier. If you skip that trial too, the next will be even easier, and so on. However, as soon as a trial gets a normal response then Quest will resume presenting trials near threshold. We hope skipping will make the initial experience easier. Eventually the child must still do trials near threshold, because threshold estimation requires it. Skipping is always available. If you type one letter and then skip, the typed letter still counts. There’s an invisible timer. If you hit space (to skip) less than 8 s after the chart appeared, then the program says "Skip", and any responses not yet taken do not count. If you wait at least 8 s before hitting space, then the program says “Space” and, supposing that the child felt too unsure to answer, the program “helps” by providing a random guess. By chance, that guess will occasionally be right. Please do not tell the observer about the option to skip. Use this only rarely, when you need it to avoid a crisis. It's good to warn the observer at the beginning that this is a game and nobody gets them all right. You just try to get as many as you can.
1. THRESHOLD. CriticalSpacing measures threshold spacing or size (i.e. crowding or acuity). It measures threshold in either of two directions, selected by the variable o.measureThresholdVertically, 1 for vertically, and 0 for horizontally. Target size can be made proportional to spacing, allowing measurement of critical spacing without knowing the acuity, because we use the largest possible letter for each spacing.
1. THE "o" ARGUMENT, INPUT AND OUTPUT. Your run script is trivial. It just assigns values to the fields of an "o" struct and then calls CriticalSpacing to do the work. You define a condition by creating an "o" struct and setting its fields to specify your testing condition. Call CriticalSpacing, passing the "o" struct. CriticalSpacing will measure a threshold for your condition and return the "o" struct with all the results as additional fields. CriticalSpacing may adjust some of your parameters to satisfy physical constraints including screen size and maximum possible contrast. If you provide several conditions, as an o array, then CriticalSpacing runs all the conditions interleaved, measuring a threshold for each. I sometimes pass two identical conditions to get two thresholds for the same condition.
1. NAMING THE EXPERIMENTER & OBSERVER. If it doesn't already know, CriticalSpacing asks for the name of the experimenter and observer. These names are included in the data files, and incorporated into the data file names. If your know the experimenter or observer name in advance you can specify it in your script, e.g. o.experimenter='Denis' or o.observer='JohnK', and CriticalSpacing will skip that question.
1. ECCENTRICITY. Current testing is focussed on eccentricity 0, but you can test any eccentricy, just set o.eccentricityDeg. When the flankers are radial, the specified spacing refers to the inner flanker, between target and fixation. We define scaling eccentricity as eccentricity plus 0.45 deg. The critical spacing of crowding is proportional to the scaling eccentricity. The outer flanker is at the scaling eccentricity that has the same ratio to the target scaling eccentricity, as the target scaling eccentricity does to the inner-flanker scaling eccentricity.
1. THRESHOLD ORIENTATION. Use o.measureThresholdVertically=1; (or =0) to report threshold (size or spacing) vertically or horizontally. The ratio SpacingOverSize always measures both spacing and size along the same axis. The final report by CriticalSpacing includes the aspect ratio of your font: heightOverWidth.
1. OPTIONAL: ADDING A NEW FONT. Running the program SaveAlphabetToDisk in the CriticalSpacing/lib/ folder, after you edit it to specify the font, alphabet, and borderCharacter you want, will add a snapshot of your font's alphabet to the pdf folder and add a new folder, named for your font, to the CriticalSpacing/alphabets/ folder.
1. OPTIONAL: USING YOUR COMPUTER'S FONTS, LIVE. Set o.readAlphabetFromDisk=0. You may wish to install Pelli or Sloan from the CriticalSpacing/fonts/ folder. Restart MATLAB after installing a new font. 

## Software requirements:

CriticalSpacing, Psychtoolbox, and MATLAB

## Hardware requirements:

A laptop running Mac OS X, Windows, or Linux, with the above software installed. 
(Or a digital screen driven by a computer with such software. We need the digital screen in order for the computer to tell CriticalSpacing.m the screen size and resolution.)
A remote keyboard: wireless or with a 10-m-long cable.
A 10 m measuring tape (or laser) to measure the viewing distance.
A printed copy of the relevant alphabet page selected from the CriticalSpacing/pdf/ folder.

> Copyright 2015, 2016, Denis Pelli, denis.pelli@nyu.edu
